.\"
.\" Package: Reference Standard M
.\" File:    rsm/doc/man/rsm.1
.\" Summary: Man page for the RSM executable (rsm/rsm)
.\"
.\" David Wicksell <dlw@linux.com>
.\" Copyright © 2024 Fourth Watch Software LC
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
.\" the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later
.\" version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
.\" Sections, with no Front-Cover texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation License along
.\" with this program. If not, see https://www.gnu.org/licenses/.
.\"
.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText:  © 2024 David Wicksell <dlw@linux.com>
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GFDL-1.3-no-invariants-or-later

.\" If you want to install this for a single user, copy this file to
.\" $HOME/.local/share/man/man1/, and run these commands:
.\"   gzip -f9 $HOME/.local/share/man/man1/rsm.1 && mandb -q
.\" or copy this file to $HOME/man/man1/, and run these commands:
.\"   gzip -f9 $HOME/man/man1/rsm.1 && mandb -q
.\"
.\" If you want to install this for every user, copy this file to
.\" /usr/local/man/man1/, and run these commands:
.\"   sudo gzip -f9 /usr/local/man/man1/rsm.1 && sudo mandb -q

.TH RSM 1 "2024 Jun 10" V1.81.0 "Reference Standard M User Manual"

.SH NAME
rsm - an implementation of the M programming language and database

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrsm -V\fP
.br
\fBrsm -h\fP
.br
\fBrsm -i\fP [\fIdatabase-file\fP]
.br
\fBrsm -v\fP \fIvolume-name\fP \fB-b\fP \fIblock-size\fP
\fB-s\fP \fIdatabase-size\fP [\fB-m\fP \fImap-size\fP]
[\fB-e\fP \fIenvironment-name\fP] [\fIdatabase-file\fP]
.br
\fBrsm -j\fP \fImax-jobs\fP [\fB-g\fp \fIglobal-buffers\fP]
[\fB-r\fP \fIroutine-buffers\fP] [\fIdatabase-file\fP]
.br
\fBrsm\fP    [\fB-e\fP \fIenvironment-name\fP] [\fB-x\fP \fIM-commands\fP]
[\fB-R\fP] [\fIdatabase-file\fP]
.br
\fBrsm -k\fP [\fIdatabase-file\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBrsm\fP program creates database volumes, manages the environment, and
runs instances [jobs] of \fBReference Standard M\fP.

\fBReference Standard M\fP (RSM) is an implementation of the M programming
language and database, which implements the latest M standard that has been
released by the M Development Committee (MDC), currently ANSI/MDC X11.1-1995
(ISO/IEC 11756:1999).

.SH OPTIONS
RSM options are used together, as shown under each sub-heading. Some options may
have different functionality based on context, which is outlined below. A full
command line must either end with \fIdatabase-file\fP or the \fBRSM_DBFILE\fP
environment variable must be set to \fIdatabase-file\fP, except when using
the \fB-V\fP or \fB-h\fP options.

.TP
.SH Show useful information:
.TP
.BR -V
Output a short version string.
.TP
.BR -h
Output a help menu.
.TP
.BR -i
Output information about the environment.

.TP
.SH Create a database volume:
.TP
\fB-v\fP \fIvolume-name\fP
Name of the volume (1-32 alpha characters).
.TP
\fB-b\fP \fIblock-size\fP
Size of the database blocks (1-256 KiB).
.TP
\fB-s\fP \fIdatabase-size\fP
Initial size of the database (100-2147483647 blocks).
.TP
[\fB-m\fP \fImap-size\fP]
Size of the map block (0-262147 KiB).
Defaults to 3 KiB, \fIblock-size\fP, or large enough to map \fIdatabase-size\fP.
.TP
[\fB-e\fP \fIenvironment-name\fP]
Name of the manager UCI (1-32 alpha characters).
Defaults to \fBMGR\fP.

.TP
.SH Initialize and start an environment:
.TP
\fB-j\fP \fImax-jobs\fP
Size of the job table in the environment (1-1024 jobs).
Size of the lock table is \fImax-jobs\fP * 32 KiB.
.TP
[\fB-g\fP \fIglobal-buffers\fP]
Size of the global buffers (1-131072 MiB).
Defaults to \fImax-jobs\fP / 2 (min: 1 MiB or 64 buffers).
.TP
[\fB-r\fP \fIroutine-buffers\fP]
Size of the routine buffers (1-4095 MiB).
Defaults to \fImax-jobs\fP / 8 (min: 1 MiB)

.TP
.SH Start a job and attach to the environment:
.TP
[\fB-e\fP \fIenvironment-name\fP]
Name of the initial UCI environment.
Defaults to manager UCI.
.TP
[\fB-x\fP \fIM-commands\fP]
A string of M commands to execute.
.TP
[\fB-R\fP]
Start a job in restricted mode.

.TP
.SH Stop all jobs and shut down an environment:
.TP
.BR -k
Kill an environment.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success
.TP
>0
Failure (errno)
.TP
255
Failure (rsm)

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.BR RSM_DBFILE
The path to the main database file. If not set, the file path has to be passsed
as the last argument to \fBrsm\fP for most commands. See above for details.

.SH INTERNET RESOURCES
.TP
Main website:
.BR https://rsmlang.com/
.TP
Git repository:
.BR https://gitlab.com/reference\-standard\-m/rsm
.TP
Company website:
.BR https://www.fourthwatchsoftware.com/

.SH AUTHOR
David Wicksell <dlw@linux.com>

.SH COPYRIGHT
This man page is for \fBReference Standard M\fP
.br
Copyright © 2020-2024 Fourth Watch Software LC

.SH CODE LICENSE
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License (AGPL) as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along
with this program. If not, see \fBhttps://www.gnu.org/licenses/\fP.

.SH DOCUMENT LICENSE
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version
published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no
Front-Cover texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Free Documentation License along with
this program. If not, see \fBhttps://www.gnu.org/licenses/\fP.

.SH BUGS
Check the issue tracker at
.BR https://gitlab.com/reference\-standard\-m/rsm/\-/issues
for information on currently documented bugs.
